JUDY WOODRUFF: When the death
camps and ghettos of Europe were
liberated at the end of World
War II, a psychologist
from Chicago visited former
prisoners and recorded
dozens of interviews.
David Boder's recordings are
among the earliest testimonies
from Holocaust survivors.
And long-missing reels of
songs from this collection
were recently discovered at the
University of Akron, Ohio.
From PBS station WVIZ
ideastream in Cleveland,
David C. Barnett reports.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Jon Endres
gingerly threads a thin silver
strand of wire through a machine
that will reproduce some
sounds unheard for decades.
JON ENDRES, University of Akron:
It runs much like a reel-to-reel
tape player, if you remember
those.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Endres
is a media specialist at
the University of Akron.
His colleague James Newhall
spent three years building this
playback machine from spare
parts scrounged from
electronic stores and eBay.
The goal was to play some
mysterious recordings
made by psychologist
David Boder over 70 years
ago on a wire recorder.
DAVID BAKER, Cummings Center
for the History of Psychology:
One of Boder's areas of interest
and an important area of
his work was his work on
the measurement of trauma.
That was the basis of his grant
in 1946 to travel to Europe to
interview a group of traumatized
people.
And this included many
survivors of the Holocaust.
A collection of Boder material
was deposited here in 1967.
So, it included some
instruments and apparatus,
documents, and it included
a box of wire recordings.
MAN: One, two, three,
one two, three.
DAVID BAKER: Scholars
were telling us that
there was a missing reel.
There was a reel of songs
that were sung to Boder by
Holocaust survivors in a camp in
France after the war.
We had a box of reels, and
scholars would ask from time
to time, do you know what's
on those?
And we had to say, no, we don't.
DAVID C. BARNETT:
But now they do.
MAN: We are reproducing on this
spool a set of songs that have
been recorded 50 kilometers
of Paris at a colony
of displaced persons.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Baker
says the recent discovery
of this long-missing
reel of songs in the
Cummings Center archives has
sparked worldwide interest.
DAVID BAKER: Two of the
songs were sung by a
woman named Guta Frank.
Guta Frank had survived
a number of the ghettos
in Poland, eventually
ending up in a -- doing
forced labor at a
munitions factory.
One song they translated for
us: "Our village is burning."
In singing the song, she changed
the lyric from, "Our village
is burning" to "The Jewish
people are burning."
In introducing the song, Guta
Frank discussed the fact that
the composer's daughter would
sing this song in basements in
the Krakow ghetto, inspiring
people to rebel against
the Nazis.
DAVID C. BARNETT: For
concentration camp prisoners
who had no means of
writing down and preserving
what was happening to them,
they could sing songs about
it to each other and pass the
stories down in
an oral tradition.
Australian researcher
Joseph Toltz focuses the
music of the Holocaust.
And, in this specialized
field, he's heard it all.
JOSEPH TOLTZ, Researcher:
This was a beloved song
that traveled around the
entire Yiddish-speaking
world, even to America
and other places.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Toltz is
particularly impressed with the
clarity of the Akron recordings.
JOSEPH TOLTZ: This is a
technology that is 60, 70 years
old and completely outdated.
And they have done it
in such a way that has
brought a completely
new quality to the sound
that is sort of trapped
in these wire recordings.
DAVID C. BARNETT: Jon
Endres was the one who
made the digital transfer.
JON ENDRES: I remember
hearing Krakow.
And I remember recognizing
some of the more German words
in Yiddish, and knowing full
well they were saying things
along the lines of burning and
dying, and it was extremely
intense.
DAVID BAKER: It's a bit like
hearing the voice of a ghost.
Here are voices that have
been silent for 70 years.
And, all of a sudden,
they're singing.
And they're singing to us.
DAVID C. BARNETT: For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm David
C. Barnett in Akron, Ohio.